On July 24th, 1969, a date of human history largely forgotten, men from the moon first landed
on planet Earth.
I believe that this nation should commit itself, achieving the goal before this decade is
out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the Earth.
The second equally critical portion of John F. Kennedy's 1961 challenge had been realized.
The Apollo 11 crew, Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins, had flown a near perfect
first mission to the moon.
It would be a tough act to follow.
These three astronauts were waiting to try.
Charles Pete Conrad, Alan Bean and Dick Gordon.
Thirty years later, the second crew to land on the moon got together to remember an electrifying
launch, a pinpoint landing, and friendships forged to inflite.
Here are their memories of that intrepid voyage.
The crew of Apollo 12 were each chosen for the man's space program in its earliest days.
Pete Conrad was a decorated Navy test pilot who graduated from Princeton University with
a degree in aeronautical engineering.
He had flown twice in the two-man Gemini program serving as commander on Gemini 11.
Richard F. Gordon Jr. also flew in the Navy's test pilot program.
He earned a chemical engineering degree from the University of Washington.
Gordon came to NASA in the third group of astronauts and flew with Conrad on Gemini 11.
Alan Elbein was chosen for the astronaut corps in 1963.
Also in the Navy Labien, he had graduated from the University of Texas with a degree in aeronautical
engineering.
He had not flown in the space program but had served as backup on Gemini 10.
I reported in in 62, the end of 62, and you guys came in the end of 63.
We came in to NASA together and astronauts in the third group.
Our selection was October 63.
Pete was in the Mercury selection and he and I were together in the second selection
group.
He made it and I didn't.
It had some psychological effect on me.
But the main thing is that we raw Navy, raw carrier pilots and that's why all equipment
performed so well because thick alumni all did our job and if you're a really good
carrier pilot, like going to the moon was a piece of cake.
The responsibility of selecting the Apollo crews fell to Donald Deak Slaten.
Picked as one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, Slaten never flew in the program
after a medical exam revealed a near regular heartbeat.
He remained with NASA eventually to become director of flight crew operations.
When the Gemini program was officially over the last flight being Gemini 12 and that
was Jim Lovewell and Buzz Aldrin, I sort of remember Deak had a say on this with each
potential crew commander or crew commander by calling them in and I can only speak on
my case where he said you're going to be a crew commander and Dick's going to go fly
your command module and he said here five guys you can pick a lab pilot and I wanted
out and he was off doing something and you were working on the pilot pilot application.
He called and ended up being in the pilot.
And so I picked another fellow that had been a student of mine at test pilot school that
I knew which was CC Williams.
He was a Marine.
Clifford C. Williams Jr. from Mobile, Alabama was a major in the Marine Corps and a graduate
of the Navy Test Pilot School at Batuxent River, Maryland.
We were training on nine and CC got killed in an airplane, right?
And so I went and said okay, I was going to come, which he did.
CC Williams died in the crash of his T-38 near Tallahassee, Florida on October 5, 1967.
He was 35.
The Apollo 12 mission patch carries a fourth star in his memory.
It's interesting to me now that when CC got killed, it never dawned on me that I might
replace him.
I didn't even think about that sort of stuff anymore.
And I was going out to the airplane one day to go somewhere to follow applications meeting
and Pete says you got a minute and we went inside an area there and he said how would
you like to fly with me?
It caught me completely by surprise because I hadn't even been given up on it even though
I had a broken heart about it.
I'd given it, you know, I said well I've been in there.
I've been surprised every chance.
I've been stuck for a minute.
Anyway, I knew that once you could get on a crew back up or prime, then you were in
the rotation so we were going to back up nine so we'd probably fly 12.
How do you get to the moon?
The Intrepid Voyage will continue.
Central to any NASA mission was the flight director.
Gerald Griffin, a former Air Force pilot, had the responsibility of shepherding Apollo 12's
trip to the moon.
Mercury had just finished when I came to work for NASA and we had already had the challenge
to go to the moon and if you really think about it, Gemini and Apollo were really kind of
the same program.
So it was Mercury.
It was all leading toward a lunar landing.
We actually started working on Apollo 12 well before Apollo 11 landed.
Training for the lunar trip was extensive and repetitive.
Formerous flights on the aptly named VAMIC Comet, a converted Boeing 707 which simulated
weightlessness, gave the crew an opportunity to practice mission activities in near zero
gravity.
Scientific experiments would have to be placed on the lunar surface so Conrad and Bean
were schooled on their deployment.
Attention to detail and restricted adherence to specific timelines were essential to the
mission's success.
After months of training and countless simulations, launch time was finally at hand.
On November 14, 1969, the crew of Apollo 12 sat atop the massive Saturn V waiting for
a go from the controllers.
We've simulated everything.
I think the simulation in a training is probably much more difficult than the actual flight
itself because you're dealing with emergencies in almost every instance.
We'd been on the suits together in the command line.
It was a familiar environment.
I thoroughly enjoyed it.
It was anticipatory.
It was exciting.
We were going to finally get to go.
I had a more sense of relief than I did anything else.
I got the trainings over and we get to go fly this thing.
Of course, when we looked out the window, there was a black cloud and a little bit of rain
coming down.
My feeling there was that maybe we were not going.
We've done this hundreds of times literally in the vehicle on the pad and also in the simulator.
It wasn't until about 15 minutes prior to flight that I said to myself, you know, we're
really going today.
I think the big thing was that if you did scrub, it's not until the next day.
It's you scrub for 28 days.
You had to wait for a whole cycle.
Looner cycle.
Yeah, I have to wait for a whole cycle.
The Saturn launch vehicle has to be one of the greatest accomplishments of all time.
Thank God for those Germans that we got after the war and that they congregated together
under on Brown at Huntsville because those guys produced a vehicle that we have never seen
anything like before, our sense.
It was so big, 360 feet high and 32 feet in diameter or something like that at the
first stage, really a massive, massive vehicle.
The integrity of that giant booster would be put to the test just 36 seconds into the mission.
The funny thing is all during training when Pete and Dick and I would be maybe having
a drink afterwards or something.
We'd say, boy, that was a tough day of training.
We did this and this and pizzas.
Yeah, we got to get this all done.
We got to learn this.
But if anything happens and it will, it'll be something we never trained for sometime
during the mission.
And Dick and I used to talk about that.
Well, he knows best.
He's the commander.
36 seconds into the mission.
Some maps we never trained for.
The launch of Apollo 12 was into some weather that we had never launched in quite that
bad before.
We had launched in some weather, but not as much rain.
It was my first time to be a flight director for a launch.
So it happened.
It also was the first time that the launch director at the Cape, Fellon and Walt Caprion,
Cappy, we're calling.
It was his first launch as a launch director.
So Cappy and I were new to the game in terms we'd been through a zillion launches, but it
was the first time that I had control at mission control and he had control at launch control.
And the weather out the wind, though Pete was on and it could see it, but the ground was
concerned.
They had an airplane in flight to check for lightning.
But there was one, was the last guy down and they said no, no thunderstorms.
We did not have any indication that there was lightning in the area.
And had there been a lot of lightning strikes or anything like that, I suspect we would
have held.
That final decision was actually made at the Cape, the launch director, and in this case
was Walt Caprion.
If we didn't go that day, the lunar cycle was 28 days, so we would have had to waited
another month before we were going to fly.
The present was there.
Everything else was ready.
It was, and nobody knew.
I'd like to think that we didn't launch just because President Nicky, I would turn.
But it was heavy.
It was heavy rain.
And there was no, I can tell you there's a myth that no reason we launched, because Nixon
was there and that's not true.
Nobody ever even talked about it.
But we thought it was a good time to go.
You know, you get one of these things that's Saturn 5, you get it loaded.
It's a big job.
There's a lot of high energy involved.
And if you can launch, you'd rather go ahead and go rather than having to unload it and
do that all again.
But all these forces are involved and someone says, well, how about launching into a cloud?
I'm sure they said, well, no, we never did.
It looks okay to us.
Well, our airplanes do cross.
Our forces were ready to go.
Yes.
I think our boat was less large.
10, 9, 8, ignition sequence 5, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, do it.
All engines running.
We finished.
Lift that.
We had lift that.
1122, we have me.
He's been standing time.
We've been trying to have me repurchase.
We have to have ram him.
He was in.
I have to have ram him.
I'm picking all of them and I think he's really gone.
He's gone right.
I've been putting the rolling pin.
You programmed to put a polygphilin on a proper course.
A few seconds after launch.
30, 40 seconds after launch.
Something happened.
40 seconds.
Mark one, bro.
This room, every light in here on these consoles, went bright.
There was red lights.
Pete started talking to us that he saw all kinds of lights in the cockpit, warning lights.
Okay, we just lost the platform.
I don't know what happened here.
We had everything in the world dropout.
Roger.
Fuel cell lights in AC.
Fun flight.
Fuel cell.
Just connect AC.
Fun flight.
Overload one and two main bus AP out.
I don't know what happened.
I'm not sure he can hit by lightning.
My first thought was, I can't believe this is happening.
We had 11 electrical warning lights associated with the electrical panel and in all our
simulations, double failures and triple failures.
They never figured out how to light all 11.
We were a butt die.
We had lost our data.
We had no data here at all.
And we were going strictly by his cues that something had happened.
Pete's the guy that had the switch that aborted if something really went wrong, this bad.
Because this was bad enough to abort.
We thought we might have to abort.
We never said that.
You never say that word on the radio.
For fear that it may be the only word they hear.
Shortly thereafter, we lost the attitude reference system from the IMU.
The primary ball just started doing this maneuver, tumbling.
I think we lost now the ISF.
The program, the one ball, just dripped it all over the place and we'll have to catch you.
Roger, Dick.
All five engines were still burning.
I then looked at the front wall plot and we were gaining altitude.
The GDC gyro display couper was driving a second reference system and it was okay.
I said, e-com, what do you see?
There was a delay.
He said, stand by flight and then very shortly thereafter he said, have him put the SCE switch to AUX.
And a young man, he was 23 years old, John Aaron, made that call.
When John said SCE to AUX, I said, what?
And he repeated it.
And I turned to the capcom who had to get the message up to the crew and I said,
SCE to AUX.
And the capcom said, what?
And finally, John came back in and he said, signal conditioning equipment to auxiliary.
So the capcom, who was Jerry Carr, read it up that way.
And thankfully, Al B. knew where that switch was.
Apollo 12 Houston, try SCE to auxiliary over.
And the AUX.
SCE to AUX.
I looked at those lights and looked at Al.
I said, okay, Al, it's all yours.
When he put the switch into the auxiliary position, voila, the whole room, we had data again.
Literally, Al asked me why didn't I help him?
I didn't get help.
He wasn't helping us.
He was just pulling us in the game right now.
I didn't help.
I didn't know what to do.
And a board in that vehicle would not have been a very good thing to do.
And the SCE tower that pulled this thing off and you didn't want to do it unless you really knew you had to.
We became the longest lightning rod in history.
We learned a lot that day on Apollo 12.
We were all weather test pilots who wanted to go anyway.
So that was our pitch decision that we should go on.
They never did it again.
I'd say that.
Obviously, after that, we said, we'll never do that again.
The Saturn V and its precious payload eased into Earth orbit,
having overcome the extraordinary events during launch.
An assessment of spacecraft systems was in order.
Astronaut's safety was dependent on the integrity of the Apollo craft.
Had the vehicle been damaged by the electrical charge.
Expulsive events happened in staging and doing this, deploying parishes and whatnot.
They were very concerned that the pyros may have been affected in a recovery system.
There was one on the nose.
They made the right decision.
I didn't even think about it.
I don't know whether you two guys did or not.
I didn't think about it.
Somebody told me about it 25 years later.
I think that's exactly right.
But they said, well, we better bring them back home.
The punch line is, we'd have been as dead coming in from Earth orbit as we would come from the moon.
So let's go.
The story of how we made the decision to go on to the moon has, in my view,
has kind of undergone some changes over the years, which is fairly typical.
If that discussion was had and I was the flight director, it was never brought to my attention.
We never talked about, at least in this room,
somebody may have somewhere, but in this room we never talked about, well,
we don't have anything to lose by going on to the moon.
In fact, again, John Aaron, this young 23-year-old, 23-24, something like that,
made the call that I think, the second call that he made,
that I thought really made a difference in this flight.
And he said, why don't we just go through the checklist just like we were going to do a T.E.I. burn.
Trans-Earth injection to head home for the man.
And if that looks okay, we're probably all right.
So it was time to let Conrad and Company know that the trans-looner injection burn
had been authorized and they were heading to the moon.
Apollo 12 Houston, the good word is your go for TLI.
Hope you do. We're ready.
We didn't expect anything else.
We didn't train for anything else, Pete.
You better believe it.
Saturn V performed exactly as it was supposed to do.
It wasn't affected one bit in this performance by the instrument unit of the Saturn V,
never built.
And once we got collected and in orbit and re-aligned the platform,
the only thing that we lost in the command module was the fuel quantity system for the RCS.
The activity is going out to the moon and likewise coming back from the moon
were fairly benign.
And frankly, I think more for the crew than the ground, a little bit boring.
The ground was busy the entire time.
We never stopped.
We could always figure out something to work on.
We're trying to all these things that we didn't have in Jebady,
like to pay for that shaving and I really have a ball up here.
Roger.
All dressed up and no place to go.
Go hook on some place we can see get bigger and bigger all the time.
The design and construction of the lunar lander began in the early 60s.
It was an unattractive and angular transport.
But pound-frying was a very important thing.
The design and construction of the lunar lander began in the early 60s.
It was an unattractive and angular transport.
But pound-frying, the most efficient spacecraft ever made.
The most absolute paramount concern on the land was how much it weighed.
And so I was involved when we decided to take the seats out and that we would fly the vehicle standing up.
I also was involved in doing all the egress work of getting out of the land to get down on a lunar surface.
And this all took place in 64, 63, 64 time frame.
We had a round hatch to come out and we had a square backpack and we could get it out of the round hatch.
That was the one I was going to mention that was changed.
And of course the round hatch wasn't satisfactory so we made it the square hatch.
The thing I remember most was a meeting with Pete early on and Dick was there.
And the government had all these neat controls and displays.
And as I said, Pete was in charge of this thing.
And Pete says to them, he says, why, what kind of gauges do you have on this ass-in engine?
And they said, well, we've got this, tells you the pressure and the combustion chamber and how much fuel you have left and several other things.
And Pete says, well, what do you do if the combustion pressure is too high?
And nothing you can do. How about if it's too low? Nothing.
Well, how about if your gas is too much? You can't do anything. How about too little?
You can't do anything about that either. And Pete says, well, why don't you take the gauges out?
I mean, if something goes wrong at least we'll be relaxed.
Lunar orbit insertion was to take place on the far side of the moon.
Only after the still-joined spacecraft came back from radio silence,
wood controllers know if the engine burn was successful.
Hello, 12 Houston.
Hello, Houston. Yankee Clipper with Intrepid in tow has arrived on time.
I guess like everybody else that just arrived, they're all free of us or plastered to the limit.
A day later, November 19th, lunar module Intrepid separated from the Command Module Yankee Clipper.
Allen Bean and Pete Conrad left Dick Gordon to orbit alone.
Well, I was kind of sad to see them go, but happy for them.
I've always answered that question that would it feel like we had to be all alone in orbit
while your friends are on the lunar surface? I answer that by saying, if you knew these two guys would be,
I'd rather get rid of them for just a little while.
There he goes. I just want to wait there. Let that damp be.
OK, I got minus one and nothing, so forget it.
The lamb performed a flawless descent burn, again on the far side, and was headed for the lunar surface.
We just watched the bird's bird rise, which was fantastic.
The specific target below was a crater pattern resembling a snowman's body located in the ocean of storms.
Waiting in that snowman was the lunar probe Surveyor 3, which had landed on the moon two years before.
Pete would attempt to park the limb nearby.
We knew we had these crater patterns that we were looking for, and gosh, you get the 7,500 feet.
Your feet forward face up when it finally pitches over, and you really get a look.
I looked at the window and it got to be 10,000 craters down there. I had a foggiest idea.
Where am I?
OK, you're out of 19,000 feet. I got something on my own. I used them out there. I got some craters too, but I don't know where I am yet.
OK.
And a bike with P64. OK.
Now, it's kind of cheating. Look out there. I think I see my crater.
And now, called out the right angle down that you could look through the site, and that's what was so fascinating because I mean here,
there are literally 10,000 craters out there. Wherever you look, there's craters.
And the guy should look down there and bang go that little crater pattern. Pop right up.
I'm not sure. I'm in true seven.
But have P60. P604, P. P604.
There it is. There it is.
I don't think I've gotten right down the middle of the road.
Outstanding 42 degrees feet.
And besides the right foot, there's a crater. I can't believe it. Amazing.
It's passing.
42 degrees feet.
Just keep top-eyed again. I'm in down to about 99 feet a second. You're looking good.
You can't look at me. I'm going for land over one.
1,000,000.
40 degrees.
LPD.
4X.
I can't believe it.
You're at 2,000 feet.
Boy's on the ground to OK. 1,800 feet up.
39 degrees.
38 degrees.
36 degrees.
You're 1,200 feet.
They, 1,000 feet, come down at 30.
Looks good out there.
They look good.
32 degrees.
You're at 1,200 feet.
33 degrees.
600 feet.
I think that's right.
Why is that crater right where it's supposed to be?
It is. You're beautiful.
240, come down at 5.
Hey, you're really maneuvering around.
Yes.
Come on down.
OK.
10% fuel.
200 feet.
Come down at 3.
Easy, come on down.
Thanks.
180 feet.
9%.
You're looking good.
I'm going to get some dust before long.
96 feet, come down at 6.
Slow down at the center.
86 feet, come down at 4.
You're looking good.
50 feet, come in there.
Watch for the dust.
40, come down at 2.
Looking good.
Watch this.
Come down at 2.
3, you got plenty of gas.
Play a gas, dude.
Stay in there.
30 seconds.
13 feet, come down at 2.
He's got it, ma'am.
Come on in there.
24 feet.
Contact light.
Roger.
Copy contact.
Pro.
Yes.
OK.
It's firm off.
That's likely a foul.
You got your standing command over right off.
Yep.
Turned out the resolution of the film was such that anything that wasn't 6 feet or bigger didn't show up.
And there were some 5 foot boulders there.
One no suitable spot.
So flew around to the far side and the 2 o'clock position and landed.
That's when Hal had not flown the LLTV and he makes a remark in there because I'm at home.
I was just driving.
I was used to find helicopters.
And when you change direction in helicopters, you know you have a certain feeling on your bottom of your feet or your pants.
And you were far exceeding that.
I thought, what's he doing?
But I didn't have time to look out.
I had to keep looking at the computer trying to support you.
But I was getting a little worried.
What's he doing down here?
So I was glad when you informed me it was going okay.
One finally did land that I was really surprised how close to the edge of the crater I was behind me.
I thought I'd given it plenty of room.
The atmosphere in here was very much like Apollo 11 and the subsequent missions that came after 12.
Quiet, disciplined, only the people talking that needed to be.
Where Neil and Buzz had been more of a business like a bunch to deal with.
Buzz and Neil were not ones to make big quips and all that.
Contrast that with Conrad.
He came right behind him.
And Conrad was just all the time making a whiz-bang-laps-flap kind of thing.
And his comments during the landing were Pete Conrad personified.
And boy, we're coming right down with this baby right down the middle.
And then his comment when he stepped off on the moon was very similar.
Neil had been very historical and Pete was very funny.
So the landing and listening to Pete, you could just tell he was having a ball.
Those less than famous first words from the moon's third visitor when the intrepid voyage continues.
That's one small step for man.
One by a three.
And then they have been a small one for Neil, but that's a long one for me.
I had a way you're going that this person was convinced that we had big propaganda department.
And Neil's words were done by the propaganda department.
I said, I doubt that very seriously.
I suspect that those words are pretty much Neil's.
He may have gone and asked somebody for some help, but it was entirely up to him to figure out what he was going to say.
And this person absolutely flat wouldn't believe me.
So we had about 500 bucks.
And I was the smallest guy in the office.
And I said nobody remembers what it is.
That's a person said anyhow.
And so they let alone who they lost.
And they think it's all I said, well, we'll just all say it may have been a big one, a little one for Neil, but it is a big one for a small fellow like me.
And I think I left out small fellow.
Did you ever collect?
No, never.
No, never paid.
It wasn't long before Pete Conrad, now outside the limb, could see they had realized a prime goal of the mission.
I don't ever believe it.
That's what I see.
That's what the side of the crater.
Will it move there?
Neil's there, yes sir.
Does that look neat?
It can't be any further six hours feet from here.
How about that?
Orbiting overhead, Dick Gordon spotted and trepid, and eventually the surveyor.
I surveyor.
Welcome, Clepper.
Using these sextant, you don't really see the lunar module, see the surveyor crater, but I was so confident of our tracking landmarks.
When I heard Pete say there was the old surveyor, that I could see the lunar module as a bright spot of light with a very long pencil-like shadow.
We didn't have the rover at that time.
We had to walk everywhere, and we wanted to make sure we explored certain areas and got to the surveyor.
We had to be near that crater because if we weren't, you never got there.
We never got there, we couldn't have found it, couldn't have gotten there.
That's the first thing we talked about it in time, several times.
Pete would say, when I get down on a go-look and see if the surveyor is there.
We wanted, and sure enough, that's the first thing you said.
First thing you said, there's the old surveyor.
Because then we knew our second EVA, which we would go to surveyor, we actually had somewhere to go and we'd probably get to parts and do the things that we were supposed to do.
Pete Conrad began to collect soil samples in case a quick departure was needed.
His obvious enjoyment in his work would have made the Seven Dwarves proud.
Hey, Al, get work out of here all day. Take your time.
Al being joined Pete on the surface.
Good shape. Here I pull the hatch cord here.
Okay. Don't lock it.
Stand by the landed 20 feet behind where I landed.
Lean the landed right, back in that crater.
The sole setback for the Apollo 12 crew was the failure of the color camera that was to be deployed for live television.
Okay, you can improve the TAD camera now.
First place, the camera on the wheels flight was black and white.
We had the first color camera, which we never laid our eyes on until we were on a lunar surface.
We always played with a block. I think we might have seen it when they stowed it.
But if I remember, I didn't show up. I told about four days before the flight.
And so we had never, ever had an opportunity to do anything with that camera.
It was on the basis. So when you came down, it showed you.
And then you were out there about 15 minutes collecting a sample.
In case we had to leave early, we'd leave to have some rocks and doing some other things, spotting surveyor.
Then I got down. And my first job was to take it out of there and put it on the surface and point it towards us.
So everybody on earth could see what we were doing.
There was real nice moving around out there.
It won't seem to get tired.
It's really hot like a bunny.
There, over where it is. There it is.
Can you hear the TV?
And?
Can you see it?
Wait, towards the sun. That's there.
I didn't know and should have known that you can't point a TV camera to the sun.
I mean, everybody knows that. Every school kid knows that.
I didn't know it. So when I took it out, I wasn't careful at all. And I pointed it at the sun.
How does that look, Houston?
It still looks the same, El.
We have a very bright image at the top and blanked out at the top for 80% of the bottom.
When he set it up, it was just one of these things that happened.
It had enough of the sun in the field of view that it burned out the sensing device.
And I don't know, I guess the guts of it.
And so we ended up without any television for that little bit of peace in the very front end.
We were already airborne on the 14th of November.
When we got back, there was this NASA letterhead paper sitting on the top of my desk back at NASA after all the whole thing was over.
And it was a whole thing about no point to camera into the sun, but it was dated 17 November.
A little side story there, Albein is from the same hometown I am, Fort Worth, Texas.
And I went to Arlington Heights High School. He went to Pasquale High School.
So we were always rivals.
We didn't know each other till a space program. But anyway, in those days we were rivals.
And then, as fate would have it, he went off to the University of Texas to get his college degree.
I went to Texas A&M University.
So again, we were in the rivals.
Well, when the thing happened with the camera, it gave me great pleasure to tell him that those Pasquale guys and those University of Texas guys just never had it figured out.
If they'd seen an Aggie or Arlington Heights High School graduate or something like that up there, we'd have done it right.
While exploring the ocean of storms, Conrad and Bean found they had some unexpected company.
The spiral notebooks attached to the cuffs of their spacesuits had instructions for reference during EVAs, along with a surprise or two.
All the flight equipment is stowed on board after its final review by the backup crew, who make sure that everything is there and operative.
And it seems like our backup crew put a few additions into our cuffs checklist.
First they had some drawings in there that were like Snoopy.
And there were some in jokes on them.
And I got out on the lunar surface and I'm minding my own business.
And I get through a couple of pages and laugh at the little Snoopy jokes.
And all of a sudden I get to a page and open it up and it's the play made of the month.
And what they did was put the girl in there that seemed to fit what we were doing at the time.
Wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, what were you doing?
Studying Hills and Valley, trying to make some observations.
So there's always a little clever about what we were doing.
And the best part of it is though we never did say anything.
It was a good 20-some years before anybody said anything publicly.
You still have your cuff checklist and I still have mine.
Back up crew and the prime crew were always doing things to each other
that they didn't tell anybody about and clippin' us in the control center.
And the fact that Pete was kind of giddy and giggling and all, that was Pete.
That's the way he was all the time.
Both astronauts were excited about where they were and what they were doing.
They knew how fortunate they were to be experiencing the adventure,
but still felt some regret.
Just didn't last long enough.
We were out two different times for about three and a half hours each.
It just went right by.
You know, you train for all those times.
You want to spend more time.
You want to spend three or four days there and be out eight hours each day.
Is that why when you got back and the phrase was, is that all there is?
It kind of was.
Well, we need to do more of this.
I mean, we just got here and here we're leaving.
Well, in the year you hit a very good point.
We had exactly the same portable life support system the rest of the guys did,
but NASA was so cautious.
And that was my one frustration because you don't get tired.
No, you don't get tired.
And the fact that they made us come back in even on the first EVA.
I mean, they were not going to let us go by four hours.
If I have a frustration today, it's what you just said.
Not being able to stay out longer.
I think you got to go a longer time on the EVA.
We've felt badly sooner than we got shut off the other day.
Although we didn't have to date it real time.
But we have agreement with the ground that we weren't going to go past the four hours.
But we had six hours where it was consumable.
So we got not early on the second EVA.
And as far as the entire thing we weren't tired, we were we could have kept on going.
We hustled to get back just to make our four hour deadline.
It doesn't have any schedule here in here.
It has no schedule here and it seems like an appointment to the airport.
I think it was a little Christmas time.
As time for leaving the moon drew near, Alan Bean began to be concerned the lone booster
rocket beneath them might not operate when called upon.
I wasn't calm and I was Pete Luxover.
It's easy.
I had been saying for a while, Pete Luxover, is there anything worrying you or something?
And I said, yeah, I'm kind of worried if they put this all together.
I mean, we're not going to be here.
And then you, in order to calm my nerves, you say, what?
I said, don't worry, bad if it doesn't light.
We'll become the first permanent monument to the US Space Program on the moon.
That made me feel good.
Three, two, one.
That's gone.
I mean, I'll let you go.
I'll let you go.
You're going to the sun.
Right our way.
And it wasn't going to go like 20 feet.
Oh, yeah.
It's a pretty quick ride if I remember it's like six minutes or six minutes or so.
With no gauges or anything to know how it's going.
No sound.
Yeah.
And you get your guidance gauges, which you're telling you, you're on the trajectory
and everything.
The big shock right off the bat, though, as soon as we shut down, why we disappeared
in this little black cloud.
Inside.
Yeah.
We had stayed with our face plates and everything on because we were so dirty and we had this dusty
cloud and zero G inside there.
And that's when we found out how persecuity dick was because when we got joined up, we
were ready to get back on board and have a good time.
You just let us in.
Two, three.
Four, five, six, seven, seven years are off.
I really crashed it burned.
I remember there.
I was tired.
Well, people were tired.
They were both tired.
We had some activities in the lunar orbit.
One mark cracking, photographing various craters and areas of moon.
That was sort of my task.
But leaving the moon, I didn't really have a melancholy.
You're wrapped up in a T.E.I.
Transurf injection.
You're concerned that the SPSA is just going to perform properly.
You're not concerned about it.
There was another one of those dynamic times where you have to make sure everything is
right.
Now, the only thing you got left is reentry.
It took about six minutes to enter.
Dick was flying the engine.
Eight minutes?
Eight minutes.
We actually got the six G's.
It's a reentry.
Yeah.
What you do, you start with a lift vector down so the spacecraft flies into the atmosphere.
Once it gets subsurptured, less than orbit will blossom.
Where you can't skip out.
Then you start maneuvering around with the simple.
That's a very, very kind of pretty looking out the window.
Yeah, a lot of that.
And I remember feeling slowing down and all of a sudden I thought, well, we're bound
to be just about ready to...
I didn't have a clock in front of me.
It was over near Pete and Dick.
So I said, how much more we got to go?
You said something like five minutes.
I don't want.
We must have slowed down thousands.
It's a funny part that I didn't.
We have to cut the droves loose before the main parachute's come out.
So they don't tang a lot?
So you get rid of the droves and then there's that moment that you have no parachute.
We can't even get closer to the mainstam out.
And that's when it's really all over.
Well, that's what I thought.
Yeah, it's really all over then.
And so I'm setting up the camera in the window and just looking out at the droves.
And the mainstam out there, we got some great shots of that.
By the way, thanks to me.
So I think, you know, I look at my checklist.
My checklist is remove camera from window.
I think, why bother?
Why bother on earth here almost?
So I didn't move that thing off.
You know, you got to turn around and put it in the bag and we're almost on the water.
And so I'm just setting there thinking this is great.
And it hits the water.
Bang, and I think, man, that's hard.
I've noticed that Dick and Peter looking at me and they're saying, punching the burgers.
What's the hurry?
You know, we just got up here.
We just got here.
We've got them.
I didn't know this.
I'd been banged in head with that camera.
I didn't even know it at the time.
And so I punched in the circuit.
Right, it was only later when you're looking at me seeing, where you been.
We didn't find out till later that the camera had come off the bracket and hit Al in the
head.
We saw them go stable too, which we never met.
The caps were flipped over and they hit them with plates and bags to get it back.
But we were in communication with them and everything sounded fine to us.
And I don't guess in real time they wanted to admit that one of the guys had gotten hit
with a camera.
That I think he should have stowed.
I think the procedures call for him to stow it and he didn't.
But again, that's like University of Texas, you know, thing versus Texas anyway.
It'd been an Aggie.
He didn't do it right.
After the spacecraft had been retrieved, the crew was placed in quarantine in case they
brought back any lunar germs.
So when we walked out the door, we were done 21 days later from when we left the moon,
which was only what, a couple of weeks on Macon Earth, we were finished.
We'd done all the work.
We could go enjoy ourselves.
It was a good deal, kind of.
And I also learned that fame is fleeting because I went out the door and my kids were in
school and my wife was someplace else.
And that only person that was around was a photographer wanted to see this big welcome
home.
And there I am putting the key in the back door of the house all by myself.
And that was dad.
And my poor guy goes home, nobody's there.
Well, it's just another day at the office.
He's lucky.
He had a key to the house.
So, I'm going to go to the office.
I'm going to go to the office.
Apollo 11 first put a man on lunar soil.
And the words the eagle has landed
echo a singular human experience.
Apollo 13 has been immortalized by Hollywood
as an endeavor gone wrong, saved by indomitable humans.
And the word was called by indomitable human spirit
and determination.
Although the Apollo 12 flight is today less well known
than either Apollo 11 or 13, the crew of 12
never felt their flight was any less appreciated than the missions
which preceded and followed theirs.
You don't remember who flew the Atlantic second?
You don't know who transplanted the second heart.
That was an example I would use.
I never felt left out between 11 and 13.
I was just glad 13 didn't happen to us because we got a chance to get there
and do the thing.
No, all of us wanted to fly those spaceships
and everybody kind of wanted to be first
because that's competitive way.
But when we weren't, we always were happy.
Even at that point, we feel that way now.
13 was a failure.
And it wasn't until later that people recognized that
that may very well have been one of NASA's finest hours
that we saved that crew.
We, NASA and the crew themselves,
saved that mission and it became a very well known success.
You see Apollo 13 and everybody knows the story.
But at that time, I never reflected in being in between 11 and 13
until it was very moment.
But I still think 12 was the most interesting one
because of the survey or first deployment of the nuclear-powered station
and then the geology.
All other guys did was, nobody got to a surveyor.
And so they had a car to run around in like,
didn't make them like us old fellows.
One of the things that Pete had said,
that served us good all the time we were training and flying,
was we're going to do this job right.
But we're going to have a good time alone the way.
And I felt like we always did do that.
And maybe that's one of the reasons we've been such good friends all the way through there
is he set the tone of doing really good, doing right, but still having fun.
Not just making it so serious.
Well, if you can't be human, it's not worth doing the way I look at it.
Mm-hmm.
Worked out good.
Part of being alive.
Here we are.
Can't be good.
Be cold.
That's another one.
I always feel like nowadays that I won the lottery twice to get to be on the mission
or just to be part of NASA during these periods when we were trying to accomplish an impossible dream.
Not everybody in their professional life gets that kind of challenge.
You know, a lot of people can do it, but they don't have the opportunity.
But we got selected and went there and they said,
you guys are going to find a way to go to the moon and walk around and come back.
We got to be part of that.
And I don't know.
I feel blessed every day.
I feel like every single day.
I just lucked out of all these people on Earth here.
Here we are.
Well, I think I would like to have gone that last 60 miles, but I have to be satisfied with the opportunity I had to fly two missions in the space program.
And I think the thing, and I remember about about Apollo, and I think we universally say this.
We've often been asked what we discovered when we went to the moon.
And we seem to respond that we discovered the Earth.
And I think when you think about it or you look at the pictures or Al's painting, you can see what I mean by that statement.
We discovered the Earth.
Well, along with what Al had to say, I was lucky to fly four.
And I think you guys said it pretty well.
We just like to be real lucky.
10 days after this historic reunion, Pete Conrad was killed in a motorcycle accident near his home in California.
He was 69.
This program is dedicated to the memory of Charles P. Conrad.
His love of flying at his fearless spirit combined to crystallize the image of the astronaut as a true American hero.
He possessed a fierce loyalty to his crewmates, a deep love for his family, and an unmatched devotion to his country.
He will always be remembered for his childlike joy and discovery, unearthed and in the heavens.